## Data for Cetiner et al submission to Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, submitted January 2024

Despite their importance for long-term climate regulation, the rates and mechanisms of seafloor carbonate dissolution are poorly understood, especially with respect to calcite saturation and the role of metabolic CO2 production. Here, we present results from an in situ porewater sampler deployed at the Cocos Ridge in the eastern equatorial Pacific, where we studied seafloor carbonate dissolution in locations with bottom water Î©calcite ranging from 1.0 to 0.84 (1600-3200 m). With cm-scale resolution from 0-35 cm, we present porewater profiles of alkalinity, pH, dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), ğ›¿13C of DIC, Î©calcite, [Mn], [Ca], and [Sr], as well as solid phase porosity, wt% CaCO3, ğ›¿13C of CaCO3, % organic C, and ğ›¿13C of organic C. These profiles provide evidence that deep-sea sedimentary carbonate dissolution occurs via sediment-side control, wherein dissolution is driven more by sedimentary processes rather than strictly bottom water saturation state. We calculate dissolution fluxes using three independent approaches: alkalinity gradients, ğ›¿13C of DIC combined with DIC gradients, and [Ca] gradients. The three approaches at four sites result in carbonate dissolution fluxes of 40 to 100 Î¼mol CaCO3/m2/day (Â± 30%). The magnitude of dissolution fluxes is a function of bottom water saturation state (Î©calcite), bottom water dissolved oxygen, and sedimentary CaCO3 content, but not correlated with any of these parameters independently. We observe dissolution at all stations, including where bottom water is saturated with respect to calcite, and present evidence that this occurs through respiration-driven dissolution within the sediment. At all sites, porewater Î©calcite decreases below bottom water values before increasing toward saturation deeper in the sediment. Using the ğ›¿13C of DIC, we partition the DIC fluxes across the sediment-water interface and find 20-50% of DIC is sourced from CaCO3 dissolution, with the remainder sourced from organic matter respiration. We present a sedimentary mass balance, assembled with mass accumulation rates and dissolution fluxes, and calculate CaCO3 burial efficiencies between 2 and 70%, correlating with water depth. Our results also provide evidence that net chemical erosion of old (5,000-10,000 years old) carbonate is occurring at the deepest site. Aerobic organic C respiration coupled with sedimentary CaCO3 dissolution, as documented here, will provide more alkalinity to bottom waters than would dissolution driven by undersaturation alone, which can neutralize anthropogenic CO2 within the sediment column in a larger range of saturation states than previously estimated.
